Blog: customizing the docker build bake hcl file (#345)
cloudnative-pg/cloudnative-pg.github.io: content/blog/customizing-hcl/index.md

---
title: "Customizing the docker build bake hcl file"
date: 2025-08-02

> draft: true

Reviewer: This needs to be changed to false ahead of publication

image:
    url: elephant_cookie.jpg
    attribution: https://www.wallpaperflare.com/cookies-elephant-breakfast-for-children-dessert-food-sweet-food-wallpaper-asujf/download
author: dchambre
tags:
 - blog
 - information
 - programming
 - applications
 - containers
 - postgresql
 - postgres
 - images
 - tutorial
 - bake
 - docker
summary: How I used Jonathan's blog post to create an hcl for my needs.
---

> ## Summary
> The other week [Jonathan Gonzalez]({{% ref "/authors/jgonzalez/" %}}) wrote an 

Reviewer: For readability in source:

```suggestion
## Summary

The other week [Jonathan Gonzalez]({{% ref "/authors/jgonzalez/" %}}) wrote an 
```

[article]({{% ref "/blog/building-images-bake/" %}}) 
on how to customize docker images using an override hcl file.
Before the [postgres-containers repo]((https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers))
was extended by the option to build the images with `docker build bake`, 
I had to do this steps, for each PostgreSQL version.

  - clone the repo
  - edit the dockerfile
  - build the image
  - push it to the registry

> So a lot of boring work needed to be done in order to have updated images.
> The chance to avoid this work sounds prommising to me, so I started with the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lot of mindless work needed to be done in order to have updated images.
After reading Jonathan's post on using `bake` and HCL files, it seemed
there was a promising way to get rid of the bolierplate. I started experimenting
with the 
```

[hcl file]((https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cloudnative-pg/cloudnative-pg.github.io/refs/heads/main/content/blog/building-images-bake/bake.hcl)) 
 

> The wrote and adopted it to fit my needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I worked on it and adapted it to fit my needs.
```

Author: ...the hcl file Jonathan wrote

i must felt a sleep when editing the blog xD

> After a troubleshooting session, he asked me to share the changes I made.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a troubleshooting session with Jonathan, he asked me to share the changes I made.
```

> So here we are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So here are my detailed instructions, in case they could prove useful to others.
```

## Instructions

> ### Step 1: Prepare local Bake file

Reviewer: Missing an article. "a" or "the"

```suggestion
### Step 1: Prepare the local Bake file
```

To build a custom image we add the following content in a local file with name 
`bake.hcl`:

```hcl
variable "environment" {
  default = "production"
}

variable "registry" {
  default = "your.repo.url/cnpg"

> }

Author: no sir, when I remove both the variables are

`$ docker buildx bake -f docker-bake.hcl -f cwd://bake_bookworm.hcl "https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git" myimage --push --builder=container --list=variables
[+] Building 0.7s (2/2) FINISHED                                                                                                                                                                                                                               docker-container:container
 => CACHED [internal] load git source https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6s
 => [internal] load local bake definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.0s
 => => reading bake_bookworm.hcl 3.15kB / 3.15kB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0s
VARIABLE        TYPE    VALUE           DESCRIPTION                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
environment		testing		
registry		localhost:5000	
revision			
`

with both in place

`$ docker buildx bake -f docker-bake.hcl -f cwd://bake_bookworm.hcl "https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git" myimage --push --builder=container --list=variables
[+] Building 0.7s (2/2) FINISHED                                                                                                                                                                                                                               docker-container:container
 => CACHED [internal] load git source https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6s
 => [internal] load local bake definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.0s
 => => reading bake_bookworm.hcl 3.15kB / 3.15kB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0s
VARIABLE        TYPE    VALUE                                   DESCRIPTION                                                                                                                                                                                                               
environment		testing					
registry		XXX/cnpg	
revision				
`

so when I remove environmen and registry from my bake file, the image will be uploaded to localhost:5000 and the subdirectory will be postgresql-testing

> }

Reviewer 2: You can modify the value no need to define the variables again :D

> }

Author: modify the value inside the hcl file?
I had a look at https://docs.docker.com/build/bake/overrides/ and that's how they override a variable inside an override file

```
variable "TAG" {
  default = "bar"
}
```

I also have tried to set it like we did for `platforms` in the troubleshooting session

```
  platforms = [
    "linux/amd64",
  ]
  environment = [
    "production",
  ]
  registry = [
    "xxx/cnpg",
  ]
```

but that's not working eighter.

    EXTENSIONS = "${getExtensionsString(pgVersion, extensions)}",
  }
}
```

Starting at the beginning of the file:

- The `environment` variable is set to `production` for all of my images, 
because I use the same image to stage it through dev/test/prod.
- The `registry` variable contains the repo upload url, so I don't have to add 
this information every time I build an image.
- The `platforms` variable is `linux/amd64` for all of my images.
- The `extensions` variable contains some extensions I use regularly.
- The `dockerfile-inline` part is extended with binaries, some of them are handy
 to have, some needed by extensions or other tools I use e.g. [pgwatch]((https://github.com/cybertec-postgresql/pgwatch)).
- With the `sed` command I add needed locales and build them.
- With the `ADD` commands I extend the image with
  - .psqlrc file, to have a nice psql Command-line even when connecting via 
  `kubectl cnpg psql XXX`
  - ldap.conf and the needed certs

### Step 2: Build the image

We can now build the image using the following command:

```bash
docker buildx bake -f docker-bake.hcl -f cwd://bake.hcl "https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git" myimage
```

> ### Step 3: Use them

Reviewer: by coherence with the step 1 title "Use it", no?

The only missing step to use the images is to update your 
[Image Catalog / Cluster Image Catalog]((https://cloudnative-pg.io/documentation/current/image_catalog/)) 
with the newly built images.
Test them and stage them through your environment.

## Conclusion

> Once you prepared the override file to fit to your needs, the only manual setps 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you prepare the override file to fit to your needs, the only manual steps 
```

to build new images are

>   - udpate the `pgVersion` variable
>   - run the `docker buildx bake` command

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- udpate the `pgVersion` variable
- run the `docker buildx bake` command
```

>   - run the `docker buildx bake` command

Reviewer: agree, the ending is a bit abrupt

- With the `sed` command I add needed locales and build them.
- With the `ADD` commands I extend the image with
  - .psqlrc file, to have a nice psql Command-line even when connecting via 
  `kubectl cnpg psql XXX`
  - ldap.conf and the needed certs

### Step 2: Build the image

We can now build the image using the following command:

```bash
docker buildx bake -f docker-bake.hcl -f cwd://bake.hcl "https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git" myimage
```

### Step 3: Use it

The only missing step to use the images is to update your 
[Image Catalog / Cluster Image Catalog](https://cloudnative-pg.io/documentation/current/image_catalog/) 
with the newly built images.
Test them and stage them through your environment.

## Conclusion

Once you prepare the override file to fit to your needs, the only manual steps 
to build new images are
  - udpate the `pgVersion` variable
  - run the `docker buildx bake` command
   I hope this helps streamline your image customization process as much as it 
   did mine—feel free to build on it, and share your own improvements too! 

>    You can find the supportive team in the CloudNativePG channels on the CNCF Slack workspace.

Reviewer: with this spacing of the lines, I think the paragraph starting line 167 could become a code block.
The lines should not begin with spaces, right?
Also, to better signal what the rendered outcome should be, I suggest blank lines surrounding the two-item list.
